Add gpupgrade_internal_workflow_README.md (#911)
greenplum-db/gpupgrade: gpupgrade_internal_workflow_README.md

│   ├── UPDATE pg_database SET datfrozenxid, datminmxid
│   ├── UPDATE pg_class SET relfrozenxid
│   └── UPDATE pg_class SET relminmxid
├── transfer_all_new_tablespaces (currently serial)
│   └── parallel_transfer_all_new_dbs
│       └── transfer_all_new_dbs
│            ├── gen_db_file_maps
│            │   └── report_unmatched_relation
│            └── transfer_single_new_db
│                ├── transfer_ao*
│                └── transfer_relfile
└── reset_system_identifier

* specific to GPDB
```

# Notable GPDB specific changes to pg_upgrade workflow

#### 1. Making schema and data visible on the segments
```
pg_upgrade on coordinator
...
├── update_db_xids*
│   ├── UPDATE pg_database SET datfrozenxid, datminmxid
│   ├── UPDATE pg_class SET relfrozenxid
│   └── UPDATE pg_class SET relminmxid
└── freeze_master_data*
    ├── VACUUM FREEZE
    └── VACUUM FREEZE pg_catalog.pg_database
```
In order to make schema on the segments visible we need to freeze the master before copying it over to segments. 

This is done in commit [5583ecdeb](https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/5583ecdeb).

---

#### 2. Do not preserve relfrozenxid of user tables for `pg_dump --binary-upgrade`

> Normally `pg_restore --binary-upgrade` would set a table's relfrozenxid, but

Reviewer: The --binary-upgrade flag for pg_restore was a GPDB addition. See https://github.com/pivotal/gp-gpdb-staging/commit/5844158d125bfc54714d65d6bb2bbf0bebf5fc4d

I've never been convinced this is needed, but it's a lower priority thing to investigate.

we've opted for bulk edits in pg_upgrade. The dumping of relfrozenxid for user
tables is disabled in pg_dump in commit
[ 381c09a8072](https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/381c09a8072).
invalidating indexes

---

#### 3. Additional flags for pg_upgrade 

**--continue-check-on-fatal**<br>
pg_upgrade's default behavior is to exit as soon as possible when a check
fails. This means that as soon as 1 check failed, the checks after it would not
be run. We have made changes so all checks will run even if one fails. This
used to be much more relevant when checks could run for hours.

**--skip-checks**<br>
This is used to skip compatibility checks during gpupgrade execute. This is originally put in for performance reasons. Before checks were optimized they were very costly. There is a hidden flag, `gpupgrade executed --skip-pg-upgrade-checks` that will skip all pg_upgrade checks.

**--skip-target-check**<br>
This doesn't seem to be used anywhere... I also fail to see how running

> only checks for source cluster fits into the current gpupgrade workflow.

Reviewer: Unrelated but I'm considering a scenario where we do use this flag in gpupgrade. If that happens I'll open a separate PR that also updates this README.

				"DELETE FROM info_rels WHERE reloid IN ("
				"SELECT c.oid "
				"FROM pg_class c "
				"JOIN pg_appendonly a ON c.oid IN (a.blkdirrelid, a.blkdiridxid) "
				"LEFT JOIN pg_index i ON i.indrelid = a.relid "
				"WHERE i.indexrelid IS NULL);"));
```

##### 2. Fix in transfer_relfile_segment to resolve _fsm and _vsm edge case
This fix is introduced in commit [466df4e26a](https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/466df4e26a).
```
	/*
	 * Because gpupgrade needs to copy MDD to segments in order to bootstrap
	 * upgrade segments, coordinator's relfilenodes, _fsm, _vm files will end up
	 * on segments. Normally this is ok since the files will end up being
	 * overwritten. However, there is an edge case where there can be data in a
	 * table on coordinator, but no data on the segment. Examples of such tables
	 * where this can occur are pg_ao(cs)seg tables. If this edge case happens,
	 * The new segment's table will end up with old segment's relfilenode and new
	 * coordinator's _fsm and _vm file. The _fsm and _vm files don't get
	 * overwritten because they aren't supposed to exist on the segment.
	 * Attempting to run VACUUM on this table after upgrade completes will

> 	 * result in a similar error below.

Reviewer: Food for thought, wouldn't it be more performant and easier to filter out relfilenodes we don't want during copy MDD step instead of copying everything to segments and doing this workaround? Also could  possibly result in removing/simplifying the `parent_partitions_with_seg_entries` data migration script in that case.

Author: I thought about this a little bit. Came up with 2 changes that may make our lives easier.

1. **Remove unwanted files during the COPY MDD step in gpupgrade.**
This would be done in gpupgrade after the pg_upgrade on coordinator is called. Implementation detail question. How would we be able to keep track of wanted/unwanted files/relfilenodes? We would want to filter out the following files coordinator `_fsm`, `_vm`, and relfilenodes.
1.  **Freeze and save current state of new MDD right after coordinator `create_new_objects`.**
I believe there are quite a few wins here with little downside I can see.
    1.  coordinator `_fsm`, `_vm`, and relfilenodes have not been transferred to new segment yet. This resolves all issues we see from COPY MDD step. We would be able to remove most COPY MDD fixes. The only one we can't remove is orphaned ao_blkdir.
    1. Remove `parent_partitions_with_seg_entries` data migration script.

This is a workaround to fix a bug from copy mdd step. In greenplum, after
collecting the relation information, bitmap indexes are marked as invalid. The
same catalog is copied to the segment, and when information is collected about
the objects, invalid indexes are not considered from the new segment. But the
segment should be reset to the original state where the indexes were valid else
upgrade will report failure indicating that there are missing index objects in
the source segment and the target segment.

Done in commit [536e786095](https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/536e7860956ffd7795af9911084dc2cb7ae8c5c0)

##### 4. pg_aoseg values from coordinator ends up on segments.
Is this still true? This may have been true we had to rebuild the AO aux
entries manually using restore_ao_segments(). I'm not so sure this is still
true. After commit
[466df4e26a](https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/466df4e26a), these
values are now transfered using relfilnodes. The values in these tables my be
overwritten when segment's relfilenodes are moved. If vlues from coordinator
are still present the effect if unknown. Formal investigation was not done. It

> didn't seem to effect segments before.

Reviewer: Let's try to answer this question before merging README. Should be quick spike.

Author: Before commit
[466df4e26a](https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/466df4e26a) every
pg_aoseg table was TRUNCATED every pg_aoseg table before rebuilding it.

After commit
[466df4e26a](https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/466df4e26a), these
values are now transfered using relfilnodes. The values in pg_aoseg tables that
came from coordinator are overwritten when segment's relfilenodes are moved.

Lookup failures.
```
     if (is_greenplum_dispatcher_mode())
     {
         ...
     }
     else
     {
         set_frozenxids(false);
     }

-    freeze_all_databases();
-
     if (!is_greenplum_dispatcher_mode())
         update_segment_db_xids();
```

The original reason for needing `set_frozen_xids(false)` is no longer needed.
We should be able to remove this an be ok.

### 2. Why does `vacuumdb --all --freeze` in prepare_new_cluster need to be called on segments?

This is part of original postgres code. It is supposed to freeze tables created
from init-db. I don't see a reason why this is still here. As ofc0b4d5bcca

[9cd8cd2630](https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/9cd8cd2630) - pg_upgrade: freeze coordinator after relfilenode transfer
we also freeze coordinator after relfilenode transfer, which should cause the
`vacuumdb --all --freeze` in `prepare_new_cluster` to be a no-op on segments. 

We may be able to disable it to further simplify the workflow on segments.

### 3. We should be able to skip get_rel_infos if user_opts.check is set for more initialize performance.
```
│   ├── get_db_and_rel_infos(&old_cluster)
│   │   ├── get_db_infos

> │   │   └── get_rel_infos <-------

Reviewer: We should prioritize this, seems an easy performance win.

Author: Story made.

```
The first call of get_db_and_rel_infos on master will gather relation information from the old cluster. This is likely an expensive call because it's trying to record all relations in the database. This information is eventually used to compare objects in the old and the new cluster in `gen_db_file_maps`.

```
├── transfer_all_new_tablespaces
│   └── parallel_transfer_all_new_dbs
│       └── transfer_all_new_dbs
│            ├── gen_db_file_maps <-------
│            │   └── report_unmatched_relation
```
When using pg_upgrade with the `--check` flag, pg_upgrade will run checks and then bail early which means it will not reach `gen_db_file_maps`. We should be able to make checks faster if we disable `get_rel_infos` when `--check` flag is used.

### 4. I see a mixture of styles for skipping code. Do we want to consolidate styles?
**Style 1:** if statement wraps the functions. This style is likely easier to read at a glance, but produces more diff that need to be handled when merging from upstream.
```
if (!skip_checks())
    check_loadable_libraries();
```

> **Style 2:** if statement immediately entering the function.

Reviewer: I prefer style 2.

Author: +1. I also prefer style 2.

Author: story made

```
static void
check_new_cluster_is_empty(void)
{
    if (!is_greenplum_dispatcher_mode())
        return;
```

### 5. Investigate this comment.
```
TODO: We are currently missing the support to migrate over bitmap indexes.

> Hence, mark all bitmap indexes as invalid.

Reviewer: Let's try to dig up some context here and add it to the README.

Author: Found. 
This commit broke bitmap indexes for GPDB6.
https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/commit/c249ac7a36d9da3d25b6c419fbd07e2c9cfe954f

They were then fixed in this PR.
AO TID changes breaks bitmap indexes for GPDB6 AOCO tables. PR says they must
be remade after binary upgrade.
https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/pull/8462
https://groups.google.com/a/greenplum.org/g/gpdb-dev/c/p8oTYMbHFaI/m/ZEDxFihlDgAJ

I don't see and bitmap index generation in finalize folder of data migration scripts or a script being generated by pg_upgrade. We may need to add that.

```
### 6. get_db_and_rel_infos is called 4 times in coordinator.

> Does this impact our performance in a noticeable way?

Reviewer: It definitely does on large clusters.

Author: Of the 4 times this is called. Only 2 times is it called on cluster's that are filled.
1. called on old_cluster to record relations
2. called to make get databases on new cluster before pg_restore
3. called to make sure new cluster is empty
4. called to get relations in new cluster to compare against old cluster.

We may be fine here unless running this function on empty databases affects performance.

1. Set coordinator's frozenxid and minmxid
1. Invalidate Indexes
1. Set coordinator's frozenxid and minmxid again
1. Copy or link files (relfilenodes) to new cluster
1. Reset system identifier

## How gpupgrade uses pg_upgrade in it's workflow
gpupgrade is GPDB's utility for performing in-place upgrades. At a high level
gpupgrade uses pg_upgrade in the following manner:
1. gpugprade initialize
    1. Generate and execute data migration SQL scripts
    1. Configure target cluster
    1. Run pg_upgrade checks
1. gpugprade execute
    1. Run pg_upgrade to upgrade the coordinator
    2. Copy the upgraded coordinator to each segment. We use the upgraded
       coordinator to bootstrap segment upgrade.
    3. Run pg_upgrade to upgrade the segments

1. gpupgrade finalize
    1. regenerate indexes and stats?

## Why are segments upgraded by copying MDD to segments?
We would like to address this specific question because it is a big reason why
pg_upgrade can be complicated. Originally this was done because it was thought
that this would be more beneficial for performance. It was only later
discovered that this is likely the only way upgrade could work for 5 > 6

> upgrade because it segments do not contain enough schema data to dump and

Reviewer 2: Did you mean each/the? or something else?
```suggestion
upgrade because each segments do not contain enough schema data to dump and
```

restore GPDB partition tables. Unfortunately, this method of upgrading segments
comes with a few ramifications.

## What are the ramifications of copying MDD to segments to perform segment schema upgrade?
1. Existing MDD files are now on segments. Issues with this as the root cause has manifests in several ways.
    1. xids from coordinator ends up on segments, they must be edited to to ensure row visibility on the segment is correct.
    1. pg_aoseg entries from the coordinator end up on the segments. It is currently unknown if this has an effect on the segments, but it doesn't seem to be causing any issues.

>     1. AO aux VSM and FSM files from the coordinator end up on the segments. We need to ensure that the FSM and VSM of AO aux tables from coordinator do not get used by segments. User tables are not so much of an issue because data is not stored on coordinator so these files sould be empty or not exist.

Reviewer 2: Might be a silly question, what's VSM and FSM?
My guess is VSM is visimap?

Author: I will expand on this in the README. FSM is free space map. and yes! Thank you for catching this mistake, VSM is supposed to be VM for visibility map.

>     1. AO aux VSM and FSM files from the coordinator end up on the segments. We need to ensure that the FSM and VSM of AO aux tables from coordinator do not get used by segments. User tables are not so much of an issue because data is not stored on coordinator so these files sould be empty or not exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. AO aux VSM and FSM files from the coordinator end up on the segments. We need to ensure that the FSM and VSM of AO aux tables from coordinator do not get used by segments. User tables are not so much of an issue because data is not stored on coordinator so these files should be empty or not exist.
```

1. pg_upgrade is fragmented because there are different code paths for coordinator and segment upgrades. pg_upgrade can be running in dispatch or segment mode.
1. Developers must keep in mind that pg_upgrade is run twice during execute. 
    1. This has performance impacts because master and segments cannot upgrade at the same time.

>     1. Any pg_upgrade bottlenecks can be twice as inefficient. One such example of this is that checks previously ran twice. Once on coordinator and against on segment. Before optimization, view checks were taking up to 2 hours for a single check, which meant that each check added 4 hours to run time.

Reviewer 2: Did you mean again or I'm misreading it.
```suggestion
    1. Any pg_upgrade bottlenecks can be twice as inefficient. One such example of this is that checks previously ran twice. Once on coordinator and again on segment. Before optimization, view checks were taking up to 2 hours for a single check, which meant that each check added 4 hours to run time.
```

>     1. Any pg_upgrade bottlenecks can be twice as inefficient. One such example of this is that checks previously ran twice. Once on coordinator and against on segment. Before optimization, view checks were taking up to 2 hours for a single check, which meant that each check added 4 hours to run time.

Reviewer 2: > One such example of this is that checks previously ran twice.

Does that mean that it doesn't do this anymore and we only run it once now?

Author: I double checked this. This is not quite true. We do run checks multiple times.
initialize - checks run on coordinator
execute - checks run on coordinator (again) and segments.

During execute we give users the option to skip checks on coordinator and segments.

Reviewer 3: To give some context on that gpupgrade does this on explicitly on purpose and was designed that way in case there are changes to the customers data set between running initialize and execute. That is, customers can and should be running initialize very early on to surface issues and work on them. And when execute runs it runs the checks again in case new data was added that is problematic and to ensure the upgrade succeeds. Meaning is better to error out early rather than fail during the actual upgrade which is quite catastrophic.

does not check views for issues that could cause a failure, but they can fail
for a variety of reasons such as using removed functions, operators, types.
View checks requires installing pg_upgrade support functions on the source
cluster.

Example 6 > 7 view check for removed types
| Commit | Link |
| -------- | ------- |
| Support function is commited to 6X | https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/pull/17187    |
| Check that uses support function is commited to 7X | https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/pull/17188     |
| Test that excercises the check | https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpupgrade/pull/903 |

## Data Migration SQL scripts
There are cases where some objects have configurations that are not legal on a
target cluster, but can be fixed with a bit a tweaking or just by remaking
them. To make migration as easy as possible for customers we may generate
scripts that fix user object to make them upgradable. We also generate the a
revert script to revert objects back to their original structure if applicable.
As of today data migration scripts are generated in gpupgrade.

Learn more about these here:
https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpupgrade/tree/main/data-migration-scripts

> ## pg_upgrade execution visualized

Reviewer 2: This is great! Thank you for doing this.

│   ├── install_support_functions_in_new_db('template1')
│   ├── psql -f GLOBALS_DUMP_FILE
│   └── get_db_and_rel_infos(&new_cluster) // to get databases
├── create_new_objects
│   ├── install_support_functions_in_new_db
│   ├── pg_restores
│   ├── set_frozenxids(true) // minmxid only
│   │   ├── UPDATE pg_database SET datminmxid
│   │   └── UPDATE pg_class SET relminmxid
│   ├── get_db_and_rel_infos(&new_cluster) // get relations
│   └── uninstall_support_functions_from_new_cluster
├── invalidate_indexes*
│   └── UPDATE pg_index SET indisvalid
├── transfer_all_new_tablespaces
│   └── parallel_transfer_all_new_dbs
│       └── transfer_all_new_dbs (currently serial)
│            ├── gen_db_file_maps
│            │   └── report_unmatched_relation 
│            └── transfer_single_new_db
│                ├── transfer_ao*
│                └── transfer_relfile
├── update_db_xids*
│   ├── UPDATE pg_database SET datfrozenxid, datminmxid
│   ├── UPDATE pg_class SET relfrozenxid
│   └── UPDATE pg_class SET relminmxid
└── freeze_master_data*
    ├── VACUUM FREEZE
    └── VACUUM FREEZE pg_catalog.pg_database

* specific to GPDB
```
### \*\*\*COPY MDD to segments to bootstrap segments\*\*\*

> At this point the primaries are "upgraded" because they got copied from master. This manner of upgrading a cluster is quite unconventional and the copies of coordinators must now be converted to segments by copying the control values from the old segment cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point the primaries are "upgraded" because the data directory were copied from master. This manner of upgrading a cluster is quite unconventional and the copies of coordinators must now be converted to segments by copying the control values from the old segment cluster.
```

# gpupgrade internal workflow with pg_upgrade

> **Goal**: The purpose of this README is to capture the process of how in-place

Reviewer: I think we can add a small section on the not-in-place flag further down, but it's only tangentially related to gpupgrade

> **Goal**: The purpose of this README is to capture the process of how in-place

Author: added --run-migration-checks as a GPDB flag in the `Additional flags for pg_upgrade` section.

general GPDB knowledge onboarding onto the pg_upgrade project. We also want to
take this oppurtunity to capture context on how things ended up the way they
did so we can find ways to make the process less complicated and improve on.

## pg_upgrade's original workflow
[pg_upgrade](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/12/pgupgrade.html) allows data
stored in data files to be upgraded to a later database major version without
the data backup/restore typically required for major version upgrades. The new
major version's pg_upgrade binary is used to perform the upgrade from the old
cluster. At a high level pg_upgrade does the following:
1. Check for cluster compatibility
1. Use pg_dumpall to dump old cluster schema (no data)
1. Freeze all new cluster rows (to remove reference to clog entries)
1. Copy control file settings to new cluster (clog, xlog, xid)
1. Recreate database and schemas on new cluster using pg_restore
1. Copy or link files (relfilenodes) to new cluster

More about pg_upgrade implementation can be found here:<br>
https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/blob/6X_STABLE/contrib/pg_upgrade/IMPLEMENTATION

## pg_upgrade's modified workflow for GPDB
#### pg_upgrade check

> 1. Check for cluster compatibility

Author: The check is conducted both on coordinator and segment. There is no difference with the check conducted on coordinator and segment. gpupgrade contains an option to skip both checks.

#### pg_upgrade on coordinator
1. Check for cluster compatibility
1. Use pg_dumpall to dump old cluster schema (no data)
1. Freeze all new cluster rows to remove references to clog entries
1. Copy control file settings to new coordinator (clog, xlog, xid)
1. Recreate database and schemas on new coordinator using pg_restore
1. Copy or link files (relfilenodes) to new cluster
1. Set coordinator's frozenxid and minmxid
1. Freeze coordinator to make everything visible for segments

### \*\*\*COPY coordinator to segments to bootstrap segment upgrade\*\*\*

#### 2nd pg_upgrade call against each segment
1. Check for cluster compatibility
1. Freeze all new cluster rows to remove references to clog entries
1. Copy control file settings to new cluster (clog, xlog, xid)
1. Set coordinator's frozenxid and minmxid
1. Invalidate Indexes
1. Set coordinator's frozenxid and minmxid again
1. Copy or link files (relfilenodes) to new cluster
1. Reset system identifier

> ## How gpupgrade uses pg_upgrade in it's workflow

Reviewer 4: This section seems just a briefed version of `pg_upgrade's modified workflow for GPDB`? Maybe we can just merge the two.

Author: My intent for this was to show how the pg_upgrade workflow fit inside of gpupgrade.

gpupgrade is GPDB's utility for performing in-place upgrades. At a high level
gpupgrade uses pg_upgrade in the following manner:
1. gpugprade initialize
    1. Generate and execute data migration SQL scripts
    1. Configure target cluster
    1. Run pg_upgrade checks
1. gpugprade execute
    1. Run pg_upgrade to upgrade the coordinator
    2. Copy the upgraded coordinator to each segment. We use the upgraded
       coordinator to bootstrap segment upgrade.
    3. Run pg_upgrade to upgrade the segments

1. gpupgrade finalize
    1. regenerate indexes and stats?

> ## Why are segments upgraded by copying MDD to segments?

Author: I will clarify this. By copy MDD I mean all of Master Data Directory is rysnc'd to the segments.

       need to ensure that the FSM and VM of AO aux tables from coordinator do
       not get used by segments. User tables are not so much of an issue
       because data is not stored on coordinator so these files sould be empty
       or not exist.
1. pg_upgrade is fragmented because there are different code paths for
   coordinator and segment upgrades. pg_upgrade can be running in dispatch or
   segment mode.
1. Developers must keep in mind that pg_upgrade is run twice during execute. 
    1. This has performance impacts because master and segments cannot upgrade
       at the same time.
    1. Any pg_upgrade bottlenecks can be twice as inefficient. One such example
       of this is that checks previously ran twice. Once on coordinator and
       against on segment. Before optimization, view checks were taking up to 2
       hours for a single check, which meant that each check added 4 hours to
       run time.
1. Indexes are marked invalid on the new coordinator which are then copied to
   new segments. We must reset them temporarily on the new segment before we
   query for all relations to make sure they are recognized when getting a list

>    of relations for relation matching that happens in gen_db_file_maps.

Author: bpchar_pattern_ops and bitmap indexes

│   │   └── UPDATE pg_class SET relminmxid
│   ├── install_support_functions_in_new_db('template1')
│   ├── psql -f GLOBALS_DUMP_FILE
│   └── get_db_and_rel_infos(&new_cluster) // to get databases
├── create_new_objects
│   ├── install_support_functions_in_new_db
│   ├── pg_restores
│   ├── set_frozenxids(true) // minmxid only
│   │   ├── UPDATE pg_database SET datminmxid
│   │   └── UPDATE pg_class SET relminmxid
│   ├── get_db_and_rel_infos(&new_cluster) // get relations
│   └── uninstall_support_functions_from_new_cluster
├── invalidate_indexes*
│   └── UPDATE pg_index SET indisvalid
├── transfer_all_new_tablespaces
│   └── parallel_transfer_all_new_dbs
│       └── transfer_all_new_dbs (currently serial)
│            ├── gen_db_file_maps
│            │   └── report_unmatched_relation 
│            └── transfer_single_new_db
│                ├── transfer_ao*
│                └── transfer_relfile
├── update_db_xids*
│   ├── UPDATE pg_database SET datfrozenxid, datminmxid
│   ├── UPDATE pg_class SET relfrozenxid
│   └── UPDATE pg_class SET relminmxid
└── freeze_master_data*
    ├── VACUUM FREEZE
    └── VACUUM FREEZE pg_catalog.pg_database

* specific to GPDB
```

> ### \*\*\*COPY MDD to segments to bootstrap segments\*\*\*

Author: This is part of the gpupgrade orchestration in golang, called in agent/upgrade_primaries.go.
```
func restoreBackup(backupDir string, newDataDir string) error {
	options := []rsync.Option{
		rsync.WithSources(utils.GetCoordinatorPostUpgradeBackupDir(backupDir) + string(os.PathSeparator)),
		rsync.WithDestination(newDataDir),
		rsync.WithOptions("--archive", "--delete"),
		rsync.WithExcludedFiles(
			"internal.auto.conf",
			"postgresql.conf",
			"pg_hba.conf",
			"postmaster.opts",
			"gp_dbid",
			"gpssh.conf",
			"gpperfmon"),
	}

	return rsync.Rsync(options...)
}

```

Segments run rsync to copy the coordinator's Master Data Directory.

   Vacuum but have struggled to explain it.<br>
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oix4am0BKII
1. Postgres documentation on transaction id wraparound failures<br>
   https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/routine-vacuuming.html#VACUUM-FOR-WRAPAROUND
1. Deep's initial pg_upgrade gist<br>
   https://gist.github.com/soumyadeep2007/ec4bb37ef9573ea6de138856ecbda0ce

**Note:** In PostgreSQL versions before 9.4, freezing was implemented by
actually replacing a row's insertion XID with FrozenTransactionId, which was
visible in the row's xmin system column. Newer versions just set a flag bit
(HEAP_XMIN_FROZEN), preserving the row's original xmin for possible forensic
use. However, rows with xmin equal to FrozenTransactionId may still be found in
databases pg_upgrade'd from pre-9.4 versions.

#### 1a. Freezing the master after relfilenode transfer
Since segments are upgraded by copying mdd to bootstrap segment upgrade, we
must ensure that the schema is visible on segments. GPDB does this by freezing
the master. Freezing must happen sometime after schema is restored in
`create_new_objects`.
```
pg_upgrade on coordinator
...
├── transfer_all_new_tablespaces

> ├── update_db_xids* <----- Make relfilenode tuples visible on coordinator, also fixes VACUUM FREEZE error.

Reviewer 4: Do you mean the pg_class tuples (which contain the relfilenode)?

Author: Make tuples from relfilenode transfer (pg_aoseg, aoblkdir, fastsequence) visible on coordinator, also fixes VACUUM FREEZE error. Tuples are made visible by modifying relfrozenxid of tuples in pg_class.

cluster. At a high level pg_upgrade does the following:
1. Check for cluster compatibility
1. Use pg_dumpall to dump old cluster schema (no data)
1. Freeze all new cluster rows (to remove reference to clog entries)
1. Copy control file settings to new cluster (clog, xlog, xid)
1. Recreate database and schemas on new cluster using pg_restore
1. Copy or link files (relfilenodes) to new cluster

More about pg_upgrade implementation can be found here:<br>
https://github.com/greenplum-db/gpdb/blob/6X_STABLE/contrib/pg_upgrade/IMPLEMENTATION

## pg_upgrade's modified workflow for GPDB
#### pg_upgrade check on coordinator
1. Check for coordinator for compatibility.

#### pg_upgrade on coordinator
1. Check for coordinator compatibility
1. Use pg_dumpall to dump old cluster schema (no data)
1. Freeze all new cluster rows to remove references to clog entries
1. Copy control file settings to new coordinator (clog, xlog, xid)
1. Recreate database and schemas on new coordinator using pg_restore
1. Copy or link files (relfilenodes) to new cluster
1. Set coordinator's frozenxid and minmxid
1. Freeze coordinator to make everything visible for segments

> 

Reviewer 2: Thoughts on making this something like:
#### pg_upgrade on each segment (after pg_upgrade on coordinator)
1. COPY coordinator to segment to bootstrap segment upgrade
1. Check segment for compatibility (same checks that are run on coordinator)

or it's too confusing?

### \*\*\*COPY coordinator to segments to bootstrap segment upgrade\*\*\*

#### 2nd pg_upgrade call against each segment
1. Check segment for compatibility (same checks that are run on coordinator)
1. Freeze all new cluster rows to remove references to clog entries
1. Copy control file settings to new cluster (clog, xlog, xid)
1. Set coordinator's frozenxid and minmxid
1. Invalidate Indexes (bitmap indexes)
1. Set coordinator's frozenxid and minmxid again
1. Copy or link files (relfilenodes) to new cluster
1. Reset system identifier

## How gpupgrade uses pg_upgrade in it's workflow
gpupgrade is GPDB's utility for performing in-place upgrades. At a high level
gpupgrade uses pg_upgrade in the following manner:
1. gpugprade initialize
    1. Generate and execute data migration SQL scripts
    1. Configure target cluster
    1. Run pg_upgrade checks
1. gpugprade execute
    1. Run pg_upgrade to upgrade the coordinator

>     2. Copy the upgraded coordinator to each segment. We use the upgraded

Reviewer 2: Let's use the markdown `1.` for numbering.

1. **gpugprade initialize**<br>
A more detailed breakdown can be found using `gpugprade initialize --help`
    1. Generate and execute data migration SQL scripts[^1]
    1. Configure target cluster
    1. **pg_upgrade s

1. gpugprade execute
    1. Use pg_upgrade to upgrade the coordinator. **pg_upgrade 1st call**
    2. Copy the upgraded coordinator to each segment. We use the upgraded coordinator to bootstrap segment upgrade.
    3. Use pg_upgrade to upgrade the segments **pg_upgrade 2nd call**

1. gpupgrade finalize
    1. regenerate indexes and stats?

## Why are segments upgraded by copying MDD to segments?
We would like to address this specific question because it is the biggest reason why pg_upgrade can be complicated for GPDB5 > GPDB6. Theoretically, a better way to upgrade a GPDB cluster would be to run pg_upgrade on coordinator and segments. This is not possible for GPDB4 and GPDB5 segments. Segments do not contain enough schema data to dump and restore GPDB partition tables. This is why segments are upgraded by copying MDD to segments. Unfortunately, this method of upgrading segments comes with a few ramifications.

> 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we mention the original intention of copying the MDD which was for performance reasons. (Granted that may need to be reevaluated). But mentioning as the main reason why seems important.

Reviewer 5: > original intention of copying the MDD which was for performance reasons.

This is also what I remember as the main reason.

Reviewer: That was the main reason, only in retrospect did we learn that
1. It wasn't actually faster in most cases
2. It created several tricky bugs
3. Upgrading segments directly isn't possible for 5->6

If there are relevant PRs or gpdb-dev threads we should pull in the decision making context here.
